+++
authors = ["Colton J Lloyd", "Ali Ebrahim", "Laurence Yang", "Zachary A King", "Edward Catoiu", "Edward J O'Brien", "Joanne K Liu", "Bernhard O Palsson"]
title = "COBRAme: A computational framework for genome-scale models of metabolism and gene expression."
journal = "PLoS computational biology"
what = "article"
doi = "10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006302"
pubmed = "29975681"
date = "2018-07-05"
keywords = []
+++

Genome-scale models of metabolism and macromolecular expression (ME-models) explicitly compute the optimal proteome composition of a growing cell. ME-models expand upon the well-established genome-scale models of metabolism (M-models), and they enable a new fundamental understanding of cellular growth. ME-models have increased predictive capabilities and accuracy due to their inclusion of the biosynthetic costs for the machinery of life, but they come with a significant increase in model size and complexity. This challenge results in models which are both difficult to compute and challenging to understand conceptually. As a result, ME-models exist for only two organisms (Escherichia coli and Thermotoga maritima) and are still used by relatively few researchers. To address these challenges, we have developed a new software framework called COBRAme for building and simulating ME-models. It is coded in Python and built on COBRApy, a popular platform for using M-models. COBRAme streamlines computation and analysis of ME-models. It provides tools to simplify constructing and editing ME-models to enable ME-model reconstructions for new organisms. We used COBRAme to reconstruct a condensed E. coli ME-model called iJL1678b-ME. This reformulated model gives functionally identical solutions to previous E. coli ME-models while using 1/6 the number of free variables and solving in less than 10 minutes, a marked improvement over the 6 hour solve time of previous ME-model formulations. Errors in previous ME-models were also corrected leading to 52 additional genes that must be expressed in iJL1678b-ME to grow aerobically in glucose minimal in silico media. This manuscript outlines the architecture of COBRAme and demonstrates how ME-models can be created, modified, and shared most efficiently using the new software framework.