+++
authors = ["Nikolay Martyushenko", "Eivind Almaas"]
title = "ModelExplorer - software for visual inspection and inconsistency correction of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions."
journal = "BMC bioinformatics"
what = "article"
doi = "10.1186/s12859-019-2615-x"
pubmed = "30691403"
date = "2019-01-28"
keywords = ["Consistency checking", "Constraint based modeling", "FBA", "Metabolic model", "Network visualization"]
+++

Genome-scale metabolic network reconstructions are low level chemical representations of biological organisms. These models allow the system-level investigation of metabolic phenotypes using a variety of computational approaches. The link between a metabolic network model and an organisms' higher-level behaviour is usually found using a constraint-based analysis approach, such as FBA (Flux Balance Analysis). However, the process of model reconstruction rarely proceeds without error. Often, considerable parts of a model cannot carry flux under any condition. This is termed model inconsistency and is caused by faulty topology and/or stoichiometry of the underlying reconstructed network. While there exist several automated gap-filling tools that may solve some of the inconsistencies, much of the work still needs to be carried out manually. The common "linear list" format of writing biochemical reactions makes it difficult to intuit what is at the root of the inconsistent behaviour. Unfortunately, we have frequently observed that model builders do not correct their models past the abilities of automated tools, leaving many widely used models significantly inconsistent.